Analysis Vol. XX | Number XX | XX 2024 | 1–9 doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/analys/anae045

Two kinds of failure in joint action: On disrespect and directed duties

Guido Löhr

Abstract

I identify two kinds of failure in joint action. First, we can fail to 'do our part', that is, fail to contribute to fulfilling the joint intention. Second, we can fail to respect our collaborators. Recognizing the distinct natures of both normative relations helps us overcome a key challenge to a reductionist theory of collective intentionality posed by Margaret Gilbert. According to this objection, we have obligations towards others even in immoral joint actions – a claim that was recently supported experimentally. Except for a handful of experimental papers, work on the normativity in joint intention has stagnated. I hope the distinction breathes fresh air into the theoretical and empirical debate.

Keywords: joint intention, respect, joint commitment, joint action, apologies

1. Background 

Michael Bratman (1993) developed an attractive reductionist account of joint intention. He argues that a joint intention is composed of several 'interlocking' personal intentions of two or more people to do the same thing. According to Bratman, there is nothing mysterious about joint intentionality and no new kind of irreducible intention needs to be introduced.

Bratman recognizes that his account says little about the normative relationships between the agents in joint action. According to Bratman, this is a feature, not a bug. Intuited obligations to do one's part in a joint action are reducible to moral obligations. No new kinds of obligation or entitlement need to be introduced. Bratman here relies on Scanlon's (1998) moral contractualism, but such details need not concern us here.

Some non-reductionist normativists about joint intention, like Gilbert (2009), object that moral obligations cannot account for intuited directed obligations in joint actions whose goals are morally insignificant or morally impermissible, for example because they are established under coercion. Gilbert's intuition of such obligations of a 'special sort' (1999: 162) has recently been supported by a series of survey studies by Gomez-Lavin and Rachar (2021, 2022, 2024). Laypeople seem to agree with Gilbert that we owe it to the other person to do our part and to at least notify them if we want to leave even if we are under no moral obligation to do so (see also Michael and Butterfill forthcoming).

However, the empirical work also finds that we do not seem to be under any obligation to seek permission to leave the joint action. This is not predicted by Gilbert's version of normativism about collective intentionality. According to Gilbert, a joint intention is a 'joint commitment', as she calls it, which does not reduce to the personal commitments of the individuals and can therefore not be terminated by the individual. A joint commitment requires an expression of readiness of all participants to be terminated. Gomez-Lavin and Rachar (2022) argue that their findings contradict both Bratman and Gilbert and therefore justify the search for what the authors call 'a new normativism'.

In this paper, I argue that the theoretical and empirical debate can benefit from the introduction of the notion of respect (e.g. Darwall 2013, Valentini 2023) and a subsequent distinction between two different kinds of mistakes one can make in joint action. One can fail to fulfil the joint intention by failing to 'do one's part'. Another, substantially different, kind of failure is to act disrespectfully. One can fail the others in one way without failing them in the other. With this distinction in mind, I argue that we can improve our understanding of the experimental findings and overcome a critical objection to reductionist accounts of joint intention.

2. Two distinct kinds of failure in a joint action

Consider the following example:

James and Paula are taking a walk together. James is ranting about the government but quickly realizes that Paula shows signs of discomfort. He immediately apologizes and continues the earlier, more successful, conversation about philosophy. But then James speeds up. This goes against Paula's intention to take a relaxing walk. 'Slow down, James! I don't want to walk so fast', she demands. John keeps walking and eventually, he is so far ahead of her that the ordinary concept of walking together no longer applies to them. Paula is confused. Did James not owe it to her to slow down? Did he not respect her enough to at least say goodbye?

I argue that we can identify two distinct kinds of failure in Paula and James's joint action that have so far not been sufficiently distinguished in the debate on joint intention. One mistake is James's failure to contribute to the implicitly established joint intention to, say, have an interesting conversation, that is, to 'do his part' (to use Tuomela's (1989) expression). The other mistake is a form of disrespect. Walking off in the middle of the conversation without notification or explanation can display a lack of due respect owed to the other person.

I argue that the two mistakes are distinct although they interact in various ways. Agents can excel in one way and still fail in the other. One is a moral wrong, the other is non-moral – until a continued failure to address it creates a failure of the first kind.

What exactly is the difference between the first and the second kind of failure? At least three features tell them apart. The first is a difference in grounding. James's rant about the government is wrong relative to the joint intention, which supposedly is to take an enjoyable walk together. There is, all else being equal, nothing immoral about James's action. The only problem seems to be that Paula is not enjoying his rant, which does not render James's action immoral. Not all morally permissible joint actions are enjoyable. Since James immediately recognizes his failure, he means and creates a certain degree of 'harm' but no disrespect. Quite the opposite. By acknowledging Paula's interests and entitlements, he pays her respect and fulfils his moral duty to her, that is, he does not wrong her in the second sense.

However, when James speeds up and then leaves without explanation, notification or permission, he not only abandons the joint action but, at least according to the reductionist, thereby terminates the joint intention. (According to the normativist, he acts against a joint commitment.) Most importantly, he engages in a different sort of failure. He fails to pay Paula the respect she deserves. However, interpersonal respect is not grounded in the joint intention. We owe people respect that we share no intentions with (Darwall 1977, Wallace 2019). It is disrespectful to simply disappear without excuse or notification. It displays disregard for the interests and legitimate claims, at least according to common societal norms.

The second piece of evidence for a distinction pertains to the observation that both kinds of failures render different reactive attitudes appropriate. Reactive attitudes like anger and resentment have long been used to track moral wrongdoing (Strawson 2008). Simply disappearing without notification or permission can make moral reactive attitudes and actions appropriate. It would be appropriate for Paula to resent James – not for failing to contribute to their earlier joint intention or for changing his mind – but simply for not respecting her enough to at least notify her when he wishes to end the joint action.

In the case of the first failure, it would be inappropriate if Paula were to resent James even before he apologizes and changes the subject. It is not permissible to resent your collaborator for making a mistake relative to the joint intention unless it is done disrespectfully, for example repeatedly and intentionally. What happened in our example was simply a mistake relative to a shared intention. James did not realize that talking politics does not contribute to it. Resentment is misplaced in this case. We often make mistakes when working with others but as long as we correct our actions immediately, we have not given them a reason to resent us.

A third piece of evidence for a distinction is that reactive actions like apologizing in response to each failure serve different functions. Imagine James, after having left without any notification or justification, realizes his wrongdoing and apologizes to Paula. The function of his second apology is different compared with the function of his first apology. The first signaled that he recognized his mistake (relative to their joint intention) and that he had no justification or excuse for it. The apology is not an attempt to fix the moral relationship with Paula. The relationship was not broken. He is not asking for forgiveness and there is no need for it. Whatever he did, it showed no sign of disrespect. It was an innocent mistake.

Leaving the joint action without notification and without having discussed it with Paula signals the opposite (unless there is an excuse). It signals that he disregards Paula's legitimate claims. It suggests that he will immediately withdraw from the joint action if it no longer serves his interests. If James apologized later, this would not just have the function of signaling that he understood that his action did not contribute to the joint intention. By leaving, he had already signaled that he changed his mind and no longer had this intention. Instead, an apology would serve the function of repairing his moral relationship with Paula (cf. Walker 2006, Wallace 2019). This also entails a promise to act more respectfully in the future. No such promise is required in the first case, where an apology merely signals the following: I acknowledge the mistake; we all make mistakes – let us move on.

3. Just a matter of degree?

Did we encounter a difference in degree rather than kind? A simpler explanation might be that we are looking at two failures of the same kind of contralateral commitments (Roth 2004) or interpersonal obligations (Gilbert 2013) that merely differ in the degree of harm caused, whether or not there was an immediate repair. In the first case, little harm was caused, while leaving the joint action without explanation and without repair caused more significant harm. If we follow theorists like Gilbert and Roth, both are wrongdoings that are grounded in the joint intention. If we follow moralists like Bratman or Alonso (2016), both are moral wrongs with different degrees of severity (cf. Gomez-Lavin and Rachar 2024).

My response is that such a view would exaggerate the 'wrongness' of an expected and abundant morally innocent type of failure. It would cause an explosion of wronging in joint action. When I do something wrong relative to our joint intention but immediately correct my behaviour, I make a mistake, but I do not wrong my collaborator. Not only is acting in unfortunate ways in good faith expected and normal. To acknowledge the mistake and change one's action is an expression of respect – not wronging. We do not always know how best to fulfil a joint intention and we do not always know in what way the other person would like to fulfil it.

For example, if I build a flat-pack bed with my partner and, for some innocent reason, I use the wrong screw, I cause some frustration, but I do not wrong my partner. Such mistakes are bound to happen in any joint action. I do not need an excuse in such a case; I can admit that I made a mistake, say 'sorry' to signal that it was not due to a lack of cooperative intention, and we move on. I would not enter a joint action if I knew I were bound to morally wrong my partner. If we assume a Kantian 'ought implies can' constraint on agency, then I have no obligation to always act perfectly according to our joint intention. This is impossible to achieve. The degree of harm I caused has little to do with this.

So I do not wrong my partner if I make an innocent mistake in joint action, whether or not it caused them some degree of harm. By changing my behaviour, I recognize their interest and claims and thereby express my respect for them. However, I wrong my partner if this mistake keeps happening without having an excuse, for example, due to negligence. Such continued failures to contribute to the joint intention suggest a lack of respect for my partner's contextually appropriate claims. So mistakes of the first kind can turn into mistakes of the second. However, this does not mean that we are dealing with the same kind of mistake and that there is a difference in degree, say in the degree of harm. It remains a difference in kind.

To illustrate what I mean, we can flip the original scenario around, as suggested by a reviewer. Imagine that James, instead of changing the topic, continues his rant, causing Paula to feel visibly uncomfortable. However, when he starts walking too fast and Paula tells him to slow down, he slows down immediately and even apologizes. But he keeps ranting. Has James's failure to act cooperatively by ranting suddenly become a case of disrespect as well as a failure to do his part relative to the joint intention to take an enjoyable, relaxing walk in the sun? Yes, I would say so. James not only fails to do his part, but he fails to do his part in a disrespectful manner.

Note that a key difference between this second version and the original version is that the joint action continues. This was not the case in the example above where the disrespect was caused by James ending the joint action without notification. Many forms of disrespect require the continuation of the joint action. This means they depend on us doing our part so that the joint action can be sustained. Many forms of disrespect require that we do not make too many mistakes of the first kind. In the flipped scenario, James can only disrespect Paula (by talking over her) if they keep sustaining the joint action.

Therefore another piece of evidence for a difference in kind rather than degree is that we can easily imagine cases of disrespect where the person who disrespects their collaborator never makes the first mistake and contributes extremely well to the joint intention. This means we can imagine a case where the joint action functions flawlessly in terms of fulfilment of the joint intention but where one person keeps disrespecting the other. We can easily think of examples where disrespect is constant even if the first kind of mistake is nearly absent – where nobody has any grounds to criticize the other except on moral grounds.

The simplest example of the phenomenon of disrespect within a well-functioning joint action involves joint actions under coercion. If I force you to converse with me about the government, for example, because I have coercive power over you, I disrespect you because I disregard your rights and interests, say your right to act autonomously. You and I still share the intention to converse about the government but the only reason we share this intention is that I force you to. In other words, while failing to be moral, I may still excel at sustaining this joint action. I can wrong you in the moral sense and still excel at doing my part in the joint action.

4. What can be learned from the distinction?

The value of the proposed distinction depends on the contribution it can make to the empirical and theoretical debate on normativity in joint action. As mentioned above, two central open questions in the literature are (a) whether reductionists of joint intention can respond to Gilbert's challenge regarding non-moral obligations (e.g. under coercion) and (b) how we can make sense of the experimental finding that laypeople apparently support Gilbert's intuition that we need to notify the other participants if we want to leave without being obligated to seek permission to leave. Does this finding require us to introduce a new normativist theory of joint intention as argued by Gomez-Lavin and Rachar (2022)?

Regarding the first challenge, I argue that Gilbert's intuition of non-moral obligations to do one's part, for example under coercion, tracks the first kind of failure. This kind of failure is not a form of disrespect but simply a wrong action relative to a joint intention. We can make all kinds of mistakes relative to the joint action that are not breaches of an obligation or an instance of wronging the other person. If we fix the mistake immediately, no obligation towards the other has been breached. And we have not only not shown any sign of disrespect; by acknowledging the joint intention and changing the behaviour, we normally express our respect towards the other participants.

Now recall Gilbert's key objection to reductionist approaches to joint intention that such a view fails to explain how a joint intention can remain in place and be referred to in our justificatory practices even if the participants all changed their minds regarding the continuation of the joint action. My response is that we can demand of the others to stick to the original plan not because the joint intention remains in place but out of respect. Paula can demand of James to slow down not just by referring to a joint intention but simply because it would be respectful to do so. He owes it to her either to slow down or to ask to change their plans out of respect, not because the joint intention is still in place.

Thus Bratman can argue that, even if the joint intention no longer exists, we may still owe it to the others to continue, and they have an entitlement to demand certain actions from us because anything else would be disrespectful. This is not an entirely new response; Bratman and Alonso (2016) have argued along similar lines. However, they have done so without the explicit use of the notion of respect. This notion is productive because it does not require previous promises and does not boil down to the expectations the other participants might have. Disappointing legitimate expectations is merely one way in which we can disrespect another person. Even if the other person had no relevant expectations, it could still be disrespectful to simply take off without excuse or notification.

The notion of disrespect can also help us move the experimental work forward (Gomez-Lavin and Rachar 2019, 2022, 2024, Löhr 2022, Michael and Butterfill forthcoming) as it gives us a more fine-grained conceptual tool to study and interpret participants' intuitions. The distinction gives us a plausible hypothesis as to why participants of Gomez-Lavin and Rachar's surveys think it is permissible to leave the joint action so long as we notify the others, but we do not need to seek their permission. The reason is this: we do not need to notify them because of some irreducible normative joint commitment or intention. We need to notify them out of respect. But they cannot demand of us that we seek their permission. Notification is sometimes enough to pay one's due respect.

Imagine I walk with you to work regularly, but we have never made any promises regarding this joint activity. We both change our minds and want the regular joint action to end. What I can do to end the practice is this: I notify you that I will not be coming anymore. I do not notify you because of some joint commitment or irreducible joint intention. I do it out of respect for your legitimate claims against me, which, again, are not grounded in the joint intention. Respect is still due even if the joint intention disintegrated. In our society, leaving without notification is a sign of disregard for the other person's interests and claims.

Still, we can also capture Gilbert's intuition. In some contexts, for example when the stakes are high, the respectful thing to do might be to seek the permission of others even if we wish to change the course of action or end the joint action. This is not evidence that there is a joint commitment that binds us. It shows only that in such contexts simply notifying the others that one is leaving is not enough – it is disrespectful. Imagine we are implicitly meeting for coffee every Friday (to adopt one of Gilbert's other examples). The more this has become a tradition, the more it feels disrespectful to simply notify the other that one will not come next time. Instead, the respectful thing to do is to give a reason. Notification is not sufficient.

Finally, we can now make sense of the most challenging objection to reductionists and a key motivation for a normativist theory: Gilbert's intuition of a normative pressure to comply with a joint intention if we are being coerced to do so (supported by Gomez-Lavin and Rachar 2019, 2024). What the distinction allows us to see is that the coercer can refer to the joint intention that they coerce us to uphold. For example, if a thief forces me to tell them the combination for the safe while threatening me with a gun, we can phrase this as a form of demand that is justified by the joint intention to help the criminal to open the safe, which we are coerced into against our desires and interests.

However, the coercer has no grounds besides the joint intention on which they can make demands. To explain this, the notion of respect is critical again. By forcing me to engage in an immoral joint action, the criminal disrespects me in such a fundamental way that if the gun turns out to be fake, I have of course no obligations towards this person to notify or to seek permission to leave. I can simply leave or even call the police. I predict that lay people will share this intuition. My distinction allows us to see that leaving is not a form of wronging (moral or otherwise). Leaving does not require any special justification as there was no obligation to the criminal to begin with. There was a mistake, but only in the morally innocent first sense of merely failing to act in accordance with the joint intention.

References [Complete list of academic references follows]