According to a once-standard view, imagination has little or no role in action guidance: its motivating power, if any, is limited to pretence play. In recent years this view has been challenged by accounts that take imagination to motivate action also beyond pretence, for instance in the domain of religion and conspiracy-related thinking. Following this trend, I propose a new argument in favour of imagination's motivating power based on a class of actions that has not yet received much consideration in the imagination literature: what I call 'superstitious–magical actions'. These actions are extremely pervasive in our lives and reveal imagination's motivating power to be larger than many take it to be. By analysing them I show not only that imagination motivates very often, but also how it does so – that is, what the dynamics of motivation by imagination are.

Can imagination directly motivate our actions, as belief, jointly with desire, does? This is a hotly debated question among imagination scholars. Naturally enough, the debate centres on cases of actions that seem to escape classic belief–desire explanations and to be best understood as imagination-driven. The most obvious one is the case of pretence actions, although in the last few decades other sorts of actions have also been considered. Here I propose a new argument in favour of imagination's motivating power, based on a class of actions that has not yet received much consideration in the imagination literature: 'superstitious–magical actions'.

When I was in high school, I always used the same pen for written tests as I took notes with during classes – after all, 'it already knew the right answers'. At university, I always wore the same 'lucky shirt' on exam days. Apparently, I am in good company. Students, athletes, sport fans, musicians, politicians, fishermen and gamblers are all social categories well known for the 'propitiatory behaviours' and lucky charms they engage with. People also engage in a variety of traditional superstitious practices, like crossing fingers or tossing spilt salt over their shoulder. Empirical surveys show how widespread these and other sorts of superstitious actions are among educated and otherwise rational subjects – and evidence from the lab points in this direction too.

What all these actions have in common is the peculiar thinking that they seem to presuppose: a kind of thinking that tends to exaggerate the meaningfulness and purposefulness of the world, seeing mindedness, agency and causal connectedness where in fact there is none (or seeing more of them where there is less) – thereby making category mistakes where the core attributes of mental and physical entities are conflated. This is what I call superstitious–magical thinking, in the terms of which I define the actions I am interested in. Superstitious–magical actions, on this view, are actions that are driven by the sort of thinking just described.

[Content continues with detailed philosophical analysis of superstitious-magical thinking and its relationship to imagination and belief...]

This work was supported by the PRIN Project Conceptual Negotiation for a Better Future: An Ethical and Conceptual Investigation (PRIN2022PNRR - P20225A73K_003).

[References section follows with academic citations]